Documenting module creation part 1 - identifiable object form and grid hooks usage (#281)
PrestaShop/docs: src/content/1.7/modules/sample_modules/grid-and-identifiable-object-form-hooks-usage.md

        $this->registerHook('actionCustomerFormBuilderModifier') &&
        $this->registerHook('actionAfterCreateCustomerFormHandler') &&
        $this->registerHook('actionAfterUpdateCustomerFormHandler') &&
        $this->installTables()
    ;
}
```

{{% notice note %}}
Hooks `action`**Customer**`GridDefinitionModifier` and `action`**Customer**`GridQueryBuilderModifier` are built
using grid id which in this case is **Customer**. If You want to use hook for any other grid 
You can check any definition factory service in `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Grid\Definition\Factory` to see available grid ids. Grid id is returned by `getId()` method.
<br />
<br />
Hooks `action`**Customer**`FormBuilderModifier`,`actionAfterCreate`**Customer**`FormHandler` and `actionAfterUpdate`**Customer**`FormHandler` unique identifier which
in this case is **Customer** is retrieved from its form type **CustomerType**. E.g id retrieved from **ManufacturerType** will be **Manufacturer**. Some types might use
function `getBlockPrefix` to retrieve the unique id
{{% /notice %}}

### Adding new column to customers grid

#### Extending grid definition and filters

> 

Reviewer: Please explain that this hook receives through `$params` a `GridDefinition` that defines how the grid is rendered (refer to grid doc) and can be modified to add/remove/modify any item of the grid

    {
        /** @var GridDefinitionInterface $definition */
        $definition = $params['definition'];

        $translator = $this->getTranslator();

        $definition
            ->getColumns()
            ->addAfter(
                'optin',
                (new ToggleColumn('is_allowed_for_review'))
                    ->setName($translator->trans('Allowed for review', [], 'Modules.Ps_DemoCQRSHooksUsage'))
                    ->setOptions([
                        'field' => 'is_allowed_for_review',
                        'primary_field' => 'id_customer',
                        'route' => 'ps_democqrshooksusage_toggle_is_allowed_for_review',
                        'route_param_name' => 'customerId',
                    ])
            )
        ;

        $definition->getFilters()->add(
            (new Filter('is_allowed_for_review', YesAndNoChoiceType::class))
            ->setAssociatedColumn('is_allowed_for_review')
        );
    }
```

In this sample a new toggable column which determines if the customer is eligable to review products is added just after another column which has id `optin`. The sample code also demonstrates how add new filter.

> 

Reviewer: Please explain that many column classes are already available - ToggleColumn is just one of them, and refer to its definition to explain the required options

#### Creating route for toggle column

> As in this sample module we are creating `ToggleColumn` we need to configure the route in which the toggling action will be performed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in this sample module we are creating `ToggleColumn` we need to configure the route in which the toggling action will be performed. Indeed when the end-user clicks on this column, an ajax request is performed and must reach one new controller to handle the action (here: toggle a value on and off).
```

{{% notice note %}}

 If you only want to display data then this step can be skipped. E.g you are creating `DataColumn`

{{% /notice %}}

- Create controller `DemoCQRSHooksUsage\Controller\Admin\CustomerReviewController`:

```php
namespace DemoCQRSHooksUsage\Controller\Admin;

use PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\FrameworkBundleAdminController;

class CustomerReviewController extends FrameworkBundleAdminController
{
}
```

- Create controller `action`:

{{% notice note %}}
**This example has been simplified for practical reasons.** 

You can find full implementation [here](https://github.com/friends-of-prestashop/demo-cqrs-hooks-usage-module) which uses CQRS pattern to toggle the reviewer state. [More about it here]({{< relref "cqrs.md" >}}).
{{% /notice %}}

```php
namespace DemoCQRSHooksUsage\Controller\Admin;

use PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\FrameworkBundleAdminController;

class CustomerReviewController extends FrameworkBundleAdminController
{
    public function toggleIsAllowedForReviewAction($customerId)
    {
        //  updating reviewer state can be handled here
        return $this->redirectToRoute('admin_customers_index');
    }
}
```

> - Create a route in `ps_democqrshooksusage/config/routes.yml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As this is a Symfony controller, we must configure the related routing, which means create a route in `ps_democqrshooksusage/config/routes.yml` file:
```

Reviewer: Maybe with a link to https://symfony.com/doc/current/routing.html

Author: It seems for me that putting links to symfony is too much. I think a person which is not familiar with it will google about it because in the text above he has key phrases such as `Symfony` and `routing`.

Author: but I saw in docs we already doing that so never mind - I'll put a link here as well :D

        foreach ($searchCriteria->getFilters() as $filterName => $filterValue) {
            if ('is_allowed_for_review' === $filterName) {
                $searchQueryBuilder->andWhere('dcur.`is_allowed_for_review` = :is_allowed_for_review');
                $searchQueryBuilder->setParameter('is_allowed_for_review', $filterValue);

                if (!$filterValue) {
                    $searchQueryBuilder->orWhere('dcur.`is_allowed_for_review` IS NULL');
                }
            }
        }
    }

```

This sample demonstrates how to extend sql of the customers grid. From our custom database table `democqrshooksusage_reviewer` we fetch the result of field `is_allowed_for_review`. This name must match the id we added in the grid definition. In order for sorting to work we also add `orderBy` condition and finally, in order
for filters to work `where` conditions are added if the filter exists in `$searchCriteria->getFilters()`.

#### Result

After completing the steps above by going to customers list you should see new column "allowed for review" added.

{{< figure src="../img/extended_customers_grid.png" title="Allowed for review column added to customers list" >}}

> 

Reviewer: Please add a summary of the "operation":
- register new column in grid definition
- as this column allows to toggle a field using an ajax request, register a controller to handle this ajax request
- fetch the data required to populate the new column

Author: I don't think we need summary here due to:

1. Its not the end of whole topic - how to extend identifiable object form part is missing here.
2. This summary exactly repeats itself or repeats the topic headlines of which users will already be familiar then they come to this point - lets see if we need it after I finish whole PR

Reviewer: Makes sense 👍

### Register hooks

On module installation the following hooks are being registered:

- `action`**Customer**`GridDefinitionModifier` - for adding new column to customers grid.
- `action`**Customer**`GridQueryBuilderModifier` - for modifying customers grid sql.
- `action`**Customer**`FormBuilderModifier` - for adding new field to customers create or edit form field.
- `actionAfterCreate`**Customer**`FormHandler` - to execute the saving process of added field from the module.
- `actionAfterUpdate`**Customer**`FormHandler` - to execute the update process of added field from the module.

```php

public function install()
{
    return parent::install() &&
        $this->registerHook('actionCustomerGridDefinitionModifier') &&
        $this->registerHook('actionCustomerGridQueryBuilderModifier') &&
        $this->registerHook('actionCustomerFormBuilderModifier') &&
        $this->registerHook('actionAfterCreateCustomerFormHandler') &&
        $this->registerHook('actionAfterUpdateCustomerFormHandler') &&
        $this->installTables()
    ;
}
```

{{% notice note %}}
Hooks `action`**Customer**`GridDefinitionModifier` and `action`**Customer**`GridQueryBuilderModifier` are built

> using grid id which in this case is **Customer**. If You want to use hook for any other grid 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using grid id which in this case is **Customer**. If you want to use hook for any other grid 
```

You can check any definition factory service in `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Grid\Definition\Factory` to see available grid ids. Grid id is returned by `getId()` method.
<br />
<br />

> Hooks `action`**Customer**`FormBuilderModifier`,`actionAfterCreate`**Customer**`FormHandler` and `actionAfterUpdate`**Customer**`FormHandler` unique identifier which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hooks `action`**Customer**`FormBuilderModifier`,`actionAfterCreate`**Customer**`FormHandler` and `actionAfterUpdate`**Customer**`FormHandler` are built using unique identifier which
```

     * This hook is a right place to add/remove columns or actions (bulk, grid).
     *
     * @param array $params
     */
    public function hookActionCustomerGridDefinitionModifier(array $params)
    {
        /** @var GridDefinitionInterface $definition */
        $definition = $params['definition'];

        $translator = $this->getTranslator();

        $definition
            ->getColumns()
            ->addAfter(
                'optin',
                (new ToggleColumn('is_allowed_for_review'))
                    ->setName($translator->trans('Allowed for review', [], 'Modules.Ps_DemoCQRSHooksUsage'))
                    ->setOptions([
                        'field' => 'is_allowed_for_review',
                        'primary_field' => 'id_customer',
                        'route' => 'ps_democqrshooksusage_toggle_is_allowed_for_review',
                        'route_param_name' => 'customerId',
                    ])
            )
        ;

        $definition->getFilters()->add(
            (new Filter('is_allowed_for_review', YesAndNoChoiceType::class))
            ->setAssociatedColumn('is_allowed_for_review')
        );
    }
```

> This houk through `$params` array received `GridDefinition` that defines how the grid is rendered. See [Grid definition]({{< relref "/1.7/development/components/grid/_index.md#grid-definition" >}}) for more information.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This hook, through `$params` array, received `GridDefinition` that defines how the grid is rendered. See [Grid definition]({{< relref "/1.7/development/components/grid/_index.md#grid-definition" >}}) for more information.  
```

> In this sample a new toggable column which determines if the customer is eligable to review products is added just after another column which has id `optin`. The sample code also demonstrates how add new filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this sample a new toggable column which determines if the customer is eligible to review products is added just after another column which has id `optin`. The sample code also demonstrates how add new filter.
```

            if ('is_allowed_for_review' === $filterName) {
                $searchQueryBuilder->andWhere('dcur.`is_allowed_for_review` = :is_allowed_for_review');
                $searchQueryBuilder->setParameter('is_allowed_for_review', $filterValue);

                if (!$filterValue) {
                    $searchQueryBuilder->orWhere('dcur.`is_allowed_for_review` IS NULL');
                }
            }
        }
    }

```

This sample demonstrates how to extend sql of the customers grid. From our custom database table `democqrshooksusage_reviewer` we fetch the result of field `is_allowed_for_review`. This name must match the id we added in the grid definition. In order for sorting to work we also add `orderBy` condition and finally, in order
for filters to work `where` conditions are added if the filter exists in `$searchCriteria->getFilters()`.

#### Result

After completing the steps above by going to customers list you should see new column "allowed for review" added.

{{< figure src="../img/extended_customers_grid.png" title="Allowed for review column added to customers list" >}}

### Adding new form field to customer form

#### Modifying customers form builder

> In this step we are appending to the customers form new `SwitchType` form field - its one of many form types which already exist in PrestaShop. More information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step we are appending to the customers form a new `SwitchType` form field - its one of many form types which already exist in PrestaShop. More information
```

> about it can be find [here]({{< relref "/1.7/development/components/form/types-reference/_index.md" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about it can be found [here]({{< relref "/1.7/development/components/form/types-reference/_index.md" >}}).
```

{
    /** @var FormBuilderInterface $formBuilder */
    $formBuilder = $params['form_builder'];
    $formBuilder->add('is_allowed_for_review', SwitchType::class, [
        'label' => $this->getTranslator()->trans('Allow reviews', [], 'Modules.Ps_DemoCQRSHooksUsage'),
        'required' => false,
    ]);
    
    $customerId = $params['id'];
    
    $params['data']['is_allowed_for_review'] = $this->getIsAllowedForReview($customerId);

    $formBuilder->setData($params['data']);
}
    
private function getIsAllowedForReview($customerId)
{
    // implement your data retrieval logic here
    
    return true;
}
```

In this sample by using [Symfony form builder](https://symfony.com/doc/current/forms.html) we just added another Form type. To determine if its
on or off we also need to reset its form data by assigning `is_allowed_for_review` value to `true` or `false`.

#### Result

By completing the steps above newly added switch is now visible in the customers form.

{{< figure src="../img/allow_for_review_switch.png" title="Allowed for review switch added to customers form" >}}

### Extending customers form after create and update actions

> In the previous example we have added switch but when we want to save its state (on or off) nothing happens. This is due to we did not used hooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous example we have added switch but when we want to save its state (on or off) nothing happens. This is because we have not used the hooks
```

> which are built for this purpose - lets do that!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dedicated to handle this topic - lets do that!
```

{{% notice note %}}
**This example has been simplified for practical reasons.** 

You can find full implementation [here](https://github.com/friends-of-prestashop/demo-cqrs-hooks-usage-module) which uses CQRS pattern to create or update reviewer state. [More about it here]({{< relref "cqrs.md" >}}).
{{% /notice %}}

```php

public function hookActionAfterUpdateCustomerFormHandler(array $params)
{
    $this->updateCustomerReviewStatus($params);
}

public function hookActionAfterCreateCustomerFormHandler(array $params)
{
    $this->updateCustomerReviewStatus($params);
}

private function updateCustomerReviewStatus(array $params)
{
    $customerId = $params['id'];
    /** @var array $customerFormData */
    $customerFormData = $params['form_data'];
    $isAllowedForReview = (bool) $customerFormData['is_allowed_for_review'];
    
    // implement review status saving here
}

```

> when we created the switch type form we named it `is_allowed_for_review`. By using the same name we can get the state (on or off) from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when we created the switch type form we named it `is_allowed_for_review`. By using the same name we can get the state (on or off) from
This hook receives from `$params` the form data, that you can retrieve like this: `$params['form_data']`.
All the form data is available here, including `is_allowed_for_review` data which comes from the switch.
```
